# DAY 4

## Vysehrad Castle (Vyšehrad)

Vyšehrad is a place full of secrets. Still, it raises many questions for us. Be informed, when in fact the castle was built. Its past, shrouded by veils of mystery, offers writers and
ordinary people several important myths and legends. From Jirasek's work are known the legends about Princess Libuse, who ruled the Czech lands from Vysehrad, and later married Přemysl the Ploughman, the father all the Přemysl family. 

Another story, which highlights the power of the Czechs, tells of the brave Bivoj, who overcame a horrible boar terrorizing the neighborhood with his bare hands. But when the site was first inhabited by the royal family, we do not know yet. There are some legends that already by the second half of the 10th century the king Boleslav II lived there. Coins discovered during his reing are the first to bare the inscription of the castle Wisegradus. One thing is for sure: Vyšehrad acquired considerable fame under Vratislav II. If someone was going from the south towards Prague, they would have to ride around Vyšehrad. They would be greeted from afar by the two tall black towers of Peter and Paul, St. Steven's Basilica, and the heavy set walls. Vyšehrad really had a very good strategic position, because it is effectively protected from conquerors. Leading to the castle are only two access roads through gates over a ditch. The other parts of the castle are protected by a huge cliff and the river Vltava. At the other end of the castle, away from the gate and over the cliff sloping towards the river, long ago there once was a royal palace. Today, we find there the so-called armory. Its builders, however, spared no material at all and by all accounts it was a huge palace. So we  onclude with a report from the council that took place in 1130 that there was a 3000 person meeting. However, at the end of the 12th century, the building suffered greatly from a huge storm.

But we return to the previously mentioned Vratislav II, who is credited with the fact that we now know what Vyšehrad as it is. His legacy is the building of the Rotunda of St. Martin,
the Basilica of St. Lawrence and certainly the greatest landmark - Saints Peter and Paul. He made Vyšehrad a founding Church chapter directly subordinate to the Pope because he was in dispute with the bishop of Prague - his brother. These disputes resulted in the fact that at Vyšehrad, Vratislav built a palace which, for his own personal safety, moved here from Prague Castle.

His successors later returned to Prague Castle. In Vyšehrad, however, they were still connected and here was the location of the coronation ceremony. On the eve of the celebration the future Emperor worshipped at the estate Přemyslides with lichen shoes and a bag to resemble Přemysl the Ploughman. It was done in order to symbolize the common roots of the ruler. Vyšehrad is truly a place rich in legend so here is one of them. At a time when the Prince Křesomysl ruled, the farm fields were barren. Křesomysl wanted peopled to work in the mines for precious materials in the vicinity of Vyšehrad. Nobody cared about the fields and they were abandoned. But Lord Horymir and his retinue did not like this at all. Horymir went to  Vyšehrad, but the king did not worry about Horymir's problems. What followed then is difficult to understand. When the miners heard of Horymir's complaints, they seized by rage and at night they burned down Horymir's entire village which was outside of the castle. Horymir managed to escape but he vowed to take revenge. Horymir's men rallied and attacked the Birch
mines, where the attackers were from. They killed all the miners and the pit ceased to operate. This of course infuriated Křesomysl. Horymir was trapped and condemned to death by hanging. Horymir however had a plan. His last wish before he died was to ride his horse Semika. Křesomysl agreed to his request, brought the Semika and closed the gates. When Horymir rode through Vyserhrad, an incredible thing happened. He whispered something into Semika's ear and suddenly the horse reared up, made a huge leap over the wall, and finally swam the
river, letting Horymir escape his captors. Křesomysl was so surprised that he decided to forgive Horymir and reconcile with him. Unfortunately Semika suffered serious injuries and
died.

## BASILICA OF SAINTS PETER AND PAUL / BAZILIKA SV.PETRA A PAVLA

A bell towers of Saints Peter and Paul are the dominating feature of Vyšehrad, visible from afar. Today's Neo-Gothic style is from 1902 by Josef Mocker and incorporates the
remnants of Gothic and Romanesque masonry. The important events that are associated with this site indicate that in the year 1070 Vratislav II created the site. Coupled with his royal coronation, the Vyšehrad Chapter was founded in the year 1085- the first royal coronation of a Czech king. Later, Charles IV chose Vyšehrad as the starting point for the Czech king's coronation parade. From this period is preserved in the church a rare plate picture of the Madonna of Vyšehrad called the Rain Madonna. The records say it was used during dry periods during which the procession asked for a weather change and the painting at this time was also included in the famous Emperor Rudolph's collections. A little known attraction of this church is undoubtedly the bells. They were created by perhaps the most famous 16th century Czech bell maker Brikcius of Cymperka- the artistry of the bells earned him an aristocratic coat-of-arms. Along with Brikcius decorated bells conveying Biblical stories, there is an unusual motif of farm work as well, allowing one to see such scenes as sheep shearing,
hoeing fields, or milking cows. The Basilica of Saints Peter and Paul, according to historical sources, also contains the remains of the first Přemysl Crypt: Vratislav II, his brother Conrad, Soběslav I and II. The excavations, however, still have not confirmed this assumption. The current form of the church from its last renovation from 1902-1903 is by Josef Mocker who built the high towers, removing the previous pseudo-Baroque towers. The relief carved tympanum above the main portal by Stepan Zálešák displays motifs from the Last Judgement. On the facade of the church is a plaque that commemorates the baptism of 14 Czech princes at Regensburg in 845 and is the location where the church's tubular bells which plays several different tunes, always according to the current holiday or important event (are there people playing or are they in the tower?) The interior was decorated by Francis and Vera Urban Art Nouveau figural ornaments. The Presbyterian frescoes are from the Viennese painter Karl Jobst which depict scenes from the lives of SS. Peter and Paul. Josef Mocker designed the main alter of the temple. On the altar in the third chapel, see the above mentioned panel painting of the Rain Madonna. The legend also says that he painted himself as St. Luke. In the first chapel on the right is the tomb of St. Longinus from the 12th century.

## ST. MARTIN ROTUNDA (ROTUNDA SV. MARTINA)

While walking around Vyšehrad, certainly stop at the rotunda of St. Martin. The Rotunda of St. Martin is the oldest rotunda in Prague and dates back to the end of the 11th century, when Prague was ruled by Prince Vratislav II. The walls reach an incredible width of one meter. The rotunda diameter is about sixand-a-half meters. The rotunda was used as a gunpowder 
house during the Thirty Years War. It was renewed as a church in 1719. Unfortunately, after one year the rotunda was damaged again and could nolonger serve its purpose as a church. 
In the second half of the 19th century it was renovated thanks to Earl Chotek. For the interior decoration, the themes which were used are from the Vyserhrad Codex.
The Neo-Renaissance altar rotunda, which is made of Slivenec marble, is decorated with paintings by J. Sequens. Let's focus on the architecture of the ancient sanctuary: On
the central building there is an apse with the unusual parabolic shape of the original walls of the smaller blocks of stone. In 1719, the old Romanesque entrance portal was
replaced with new Baroque tiles. Because of the bombing of Prague and the Prussian army in 1757, the building was badly damaged. In memory of this event, one of the Prussian cannonballs was bricked into its walls, which can be seen there today. In 1784 the Emperor Joseph II ordered it to be used as a warehouse. When the building of a new communications system threatened the Vyšehrad's rotunda with demolition, it is thanks to the Surgeon Earl Chotek that it was saved. The rotunda was then rented as housing for the poor. The was pnctured for a new entry and in the apse a kitchen was built and another hole was made in the ceiling for a chimney. At the end of the 19th century the Vyšehrad canonry bought the building back and it was restored, giving it its most recent form. It has been restored back to its Romanesque origins. A new entry portal was put in, windows covered the lanterns, and an accompanying stucco cornices as well as the windows got new stained-glass panes.

## ST. LAWRENCE BASILICA (BAZILIKA SV. VAVŘINCE)

The masonry of the foundations of St. Lawrence can be seen in the baroque residence No.14 on Sobeslav street, close to the prince's home and the royal acropolis of the medieval castle. The building was originally a three nave design with a transept and semicircular apse. Believed to have been found in the private chapel of Vratislav II, come some of the oldest archaeological finds: tiles that are embossed with motifs of the sphinx, the Emperor Nero, griffin and lion-dog hybrids. These are now on view at St. Lawrence. The basilica was destroyed by the Hussites in 1420 but has since been restored.

## VYSEHRAD CEMETERY (VYŠEHRADSKÝ HŘBITOV A SLAVÍN)

The Vysehrad cemetery forms a dominant part of the Vyšehrad National Cultural Monument. The graves of meritorious personages are concentrated here, many of those who
contributed to Czech culture, education, national selfdetermination and the independence of the country.

Every day, all year round hundreds of visitors from all corners of the Czech Republic and the five continents pay visits to Vyšehrad, the Upper Castle. People who have come from afar often do not have time to go into all the details, and so they tend to be on the lookout for names that are familiar to them. The most frequent cultural link to our country takes
the form of music, and their first visit to the Vyšehrad cemetery takes them to the tomb of Antonín Dvořák. The citizens of the United States often think of him as a founder of their
national music. One motif from his 9th symphony in EMinor, "From the New World" (Largo) became the state anthem of one of the states of the Union - Iowa. Many in Europe and as far as Japan also know the music of Bedřich Smetana. Among writers the best-known to guests not only from the English-speaking countries is Karel Čapek.

Until the early sixties of the nineteenth century, this cemetery covered only a small area in the immediately vicinity of the Church of SS Peter and Paul. After the fall of the absolutist regime that had ruled over the country after the defeat of the revolutionary movement in the year 1848, there occurred a certain detente in political life, and with it began
a tempestuous spread of national self-awareness. One of the forms this took was the longing to set up a common burial place of all those who had made major contributions
to the national renaissance, similar to such places that existed in other great European countries. This idea arose in the patriotic Svatobor Association, founded by the "Father of the Nation", the historian František Palacký in 1862. The selection of the most suitable and most dignified place led to the choice of Vyšehrad, associated with the oldest Czech legends, a lasting source of Czech history described in the oldest chronicles. Beginning in the Romanesque period there is historic proof that Vyšehrad was the residence of Czech princes and kings. One of the most famous of these, Charles IV, King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor, stipulated that the Bohemian coronation ceremony should take its starting point in this place.
At the beginning only individual tombs were set up - the first above the grave of writer, librarian and archive-keepe Vácslav Hanka, which lies close to the main entrance. At its
top is the symbol of the Svatobor Association : three hands holding a ring, the symbol of the association logo: Help Enlighten - Remember. Thanks to the efforts of the patriotic priest Václav Štulc, provost of the Vyšehrad Chapter, the existing small burial ground was enlarged until, at the end of the nineteenth century, it reached its present size. Simultaneous with the reconstruction of the Chapter church in NeoGothic style, the cemetery was given artistic form: Half of its perimeter was lined with Neo-Renaissance arcades with ostentatious graves, and in 1893 the dominant feature of the cemetery, the Slavín (Pantheon), the common tomb of the most meritorious personages, was finished. The designer of the arcades and the Pantheon was Antonín Wiehl, disciple and follower of the greatest Czech architect of the 19th century, Josef Zítek, who, among others, built the National Theatre. The construction work was made possible by a gift of a patriotic entrepreneur and mayor of Smíchov, Petr Fischer, who entrusted the property and care to the Svatobor Association, who had initiated the idea of the construction. 

The Pantheon symbolizes the entire sacred ground, where among the thousands who devoted their lives to their families, to crafts, offices and services of their fellow citizens,
there rest personages who stood out among their surroundings by meritorious work for society as a whole, for the nation and their homeland in the spheres of culture, science, the economy, in spiritual service, physical culture, the administration of public affairs, in politics, men and women engraved in our memory by their fate as victims of wars and
persecution. Above their graves there rises the architecture of the Pantheon as a common tomb to those without whose contribution our Czech nation would not have gained its
present-day appearance, level of culture and education. The Vyšehrad cemetery is not a museum with a closed history, as is the case of other cemeteries in Prague, in the
Lesser Town or the older parts of Olšany cemetery, where no burials take place any more. From time to time the sad moment arrives when somebody who has departed for ever
is placed into the sacred ground of Vyšehrad to become immortal through his work and in our memories. The Vyšehrad cemetery and its pantheon are not the sole burial places of all famous men and women who contributed to the memory of the nation and the general public. Many rest elsewhere, as was their last wish or that of their families. Some in their places of birth, others, where they worked and died. Here we shall deal with that selection from our history provided by a short walk through the Vyšehrad.





